This is the first draft of what I'm hoping will be a much considered new wave of church organizational structuring; one that focuses on distributed work, without the need of a building. Inspiration for this manifesto is heavily drawn from modern startup companies, in which teams and work are distributed and information is shared across the organization in a flat structure. My hope is that by following a similar approach, a church organization can encourage their pastors to focus on relationships with their patrons, while maintaining the organization necessary to care for the congregation as a whole.

My hope is that this document will be a living work in progress. I plan to spend months iterating this manfesto as I connect with friends old and new on their experience in the church.

Please understand, I'm writing this with a deep affection for the Church. I love the Church. I have found in my experience that many times people employed by the church are disorganized, and ill-equipped to do the organizational portion of their work. This doesn't mean that the person responsible is disorganized, it simply implies that the nature of their work leads to a disorganized workflow when each person is left to their own devices. My ultimate desire is to seek out and aggregate the best tools and practices for people within the church to share information and distribute tasks appropriately throughout the organization's structure. My hope is by doing this it will allow people employed by the church to spend less time doing work about work. 

Another point of contention that I've found in my years within the church is a lacking in self-development. I've seen companies over and over again in the tech sector promoting self-improvement of all their employees. Through programs like "free Amazon books" and fitbits for the entire staff, I've seen companies prove time and again how much they want their employees well- knowing that ultimately it will make for a happier employee, which will in turn increase the quality of their work. Taking this thought a step further, there is a belief within the church that the body and spirit are intertwined. If that is the case, then another reason for rest, exercise, and mental growth, is that they actually go hand in hand with the health of the spirit. Unfortunately, churches can be notorious for being busy. Finding work for their staff to justify their salaries (even when their salaries are lower than average) is a common practice within the church. One practice that I think desperately needs to stop.

A final point in which I hope to tackle is that of the financial health of a church. This topis is extremely touchy, and I can't say that I have much experience in the area of a church budget, so I won't approach the concept like I do. However, I've seen many a tech company keep their financial stats in a public location- even blog about them on a monthly basis! - and are praised for their transparency. What would it be like for churches to walk boldly in their financial stewardship- showing the numbers to anyone who cares to look. Would there be some reactionary people in the church who might yell and scream to get what they think the church should accomplish? Sure. That's bound to happen regardless of if the stats are public. These situations could either prove that a) the church may be handling the money poorly, in which case a redirection would be a good thing for the church, or b) the church member finds that they don't actually align with the values of the church, and decide to go elsewhere. That's fine too.


As you can see, I've got some strong feelings in the topics above. I hope that in the coming months I can begin to form some concrete thoughts on the manifesto as well as practices that should apply to church teams of all different sizes.

What would it be like for a mega-church to own it's own building, but be sustainable by renting out their building during the week, since all their employees can work remotely? What would it be like for a church to have a community outreach program in which underpriveledged youth are giving sustainable jobs, and can use the church as a home base? What would it be like for churches to spend less on programs, on buildings and campaigns, and instead be intentionally lean and thrifty; even cash-flow positive, in hopes that they can be a blessing to their community and their teams?

That's all for now. Thanks so much for reading.